In Steve McConnell's book [Code Complete](http://cc2e.com), he remarks on the importance of iterating through multiple solutions. Over the holidays, my family decided to conduct an impromptu secret Santa. My brother, not one for reckless consumerism (a very good thing), opted not to participate and instead took on the task of matching givers and recipients. I felt it would prove a good exercise for me, though, to create script for handling this task.

In reflecting upon the problem, I arrived at the three rules which would define the selection process:

* You cannot choose yourself
* You cannot choose your partner
* You cannot choose someone who has already been chosen

To start, I took a brute force approach to quickly reach the goal. Here is the primary method in the Elf class which uses some while loops:

    def match_participants(the_hat)
      participants = the_hat.clone
      assignments = []
      while true
        participants.each do |participant|
          if the_hat.size < 3 && the_hat.size > 0
            break unless remaining_recipients_are_valid(the_hat, participant)
          end

          keep_looking_for_individual_match = true
          while keep_looking_for_individual_match
            possible_match = the_hat.sample
            # retry if the possible_match is the participant or the
            # participants's partner
            if possible_match.name == participant.name ||
               (!participant.partner.nil? &&
               possible_match.name == participant.partner)
            else
              assignments.push([participant, possible_match])
              keep_looking_for_individual_match = false
              the_hat.each_with_index do |recipient, index|
                if recipient.name == possible_match.name
                  the_hat.delete_at(index)
                  break
                end
              end
            end
          end
        end

        return assignments if the_hat.empty?

        assignments.clear
        the_hat.clear
        the_hat = participants.clone
      end
    end

The method takes in an array of participant objects (each of which has a name and a partner - the partner can be nil) for the assignment and relies on a private function, **remaining\_recipients\_are\_valid**, to perform an initial validation when working through the last few participants. While this code does achieve the desired effect, it has many problems. To name a few, the method is way too long, has too many levels of nesting, and does not account for certain edge cases. The main problem though, is that the method could loop for quite some time if it continues to try invalid combinations. In our secret Santa, we had five participants. This main problem would certainly be exacerbated were there more.

There is definitely a better algorithm for this. In a later iteration, I decided that the best way would to determine all of the order permutations for the recipients list, iterate through them and remove the invalid ones, and lastly, randomly choose from one of the remaining valid options. Here is the new full Elf class:

    class Elf
      def match_participants(the_hat)
        get_valid_permutations(the_hat).sample
      end

      private

      def get_valid_permutations(the_hat)
        valid_permutations = []
        permutations = the_hat.permutation.to_a
        permutations.each do |permutation|
          all_valid_combinations = true
          the_hat.each_with_index do |participant, index|
            all_valid_combinations = false unless
              valid_combination?(participant, permutation[index])
          end
          valid_permutations.push(permutation) if all_valid_combinations
        end
        valid_permutations
      end

      def valid_combination?(participant, recipient)
        if participant.name == recipient.name ||
          participant.partner == recipient.name
          false
        else
          true
        end
      end
    end

This is a significant improvement. The class has more than halved in size ([As per the commit on Github, there are 36 fewer lines](https://github.com/davidenglishmusic/secret_santa/commit/30eeaa47fcd061721f27c305edc3da1bd09471bb)), it makes use of Ruby's built-in permutation method, the methods are much smaller and readable, and the issue of retrying invalid combinations has been solved. There are possibly more optimizations that could be made but this is a clear example of how iterating through solutions can result in much better code.
